# The Nature of Javana-Citta


The arising and falling away of bhavanga-cittas and of
vīthi-cittas, cittas arising in processes, is our ordinary daily life.
When one hears about the Dhamma terms that explain the characteristics
and functions of the different cittas, but does not understand the
meaning of these terms, one may have doubts. All these terms explain the
characteristics of realities, and these exist not merely in textbooks,
they occur in daily life. They occur each time cittas arise that are
seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, experiencing tangible object or
thinking. At this moment, we are seeing, and thus we can know that there
are cittas arising in a process. There is the arising of eye-door
adverting-consciousness, seeing-consciousness, receiving-consciousness,
investigating-consciousness, determining-consciousness and
javana-cittas. All these cittas arise and fall away in succession. Right
understanding of the Dhamma will remind us to consider whether the
javana-cittas that arise after seeing, hearing or the other
sense-cognitions are kusala cittas or akusala cittas. The javana-cittas
arise in their own series. 

When we have learned about the four “jātis” of kusala,
akusala, vipāka and kiriya, we shall come to know which citta is cause,
producing result in the form of vipākacitta that arises later on. We
shall come to know which citta is vipāka, the result produced by a
cause, by kamma performed in the past. We should know the jāti, the
nature, of the cittas that arise in processes and of those that do not
arise in processes. We should, for example, know that
rebirth-consciousness is vipākacitta, the result of kamma. One kamma
among all the kammas performed in the past is the condition for the
rebirth-consciousness to succeed the dying-consciousness of the previous
life. The rebirth-consciousness is vipākacitta that performs the
function of rebirth only once. It performs this function once and for
all in a lifespan, at the first moment of life, when it succeeds the
dying-consciousness of the previous life. Thus, it cannot perform this
function again in one lifespan. The rebirth-consciousness arises and
then falls away immediately; it does not last. 

The rebirth-consciousness, which is of the jāti of
vipāka, is contiguity-condition, anantara-paccaya, for the immediate
arising of the succeeding citta. This citta, which is not vīthi-citta,
but performs the function of bhavanga, is also vipāka. Kamma does not
only condition the arising of rebirth-consciousness, it also conditions
the arising of the succeeding bhavanga-cittas which perform the function
of bhavanga, life-continuum. The bhavanga-citta that immediately
succeeds the rebirth-consciousness is called “first bhavanga” (paṭhama
bhavanga). The next bhavanga-cittas, arising throughout life until the
dying-consciousness, are not called by any particular name. They are
countless.

Bhavanga-cittas arise and fall away in succession, all
the time, until vīthi-citta arises. The vīthi-citta that arises first in
a process, before the other vīthi-cittas, is the citta that performs the
function of adverting to the object. There are two types of
adverting-consciousness: the five-sense-door adverting-consciousness,
which performs the function of adverting through the five sense-doors,
and the mind-door adverting-consciousness, which performs the function
of adverting through the mind-door. Both types of citta are kiriyacitta,
thus, not kusala citta, akusala citta or vipākacitta. These types of
kiriyacitta can experience an object that is pleasant and agreeable
(iṭṭhārammaṇa) as well as an object that is unpleasant (aniṭṭhārammaṇa).
In the case of vipākacitta the situation is different, because akusala
vipākacitta can experience only an unpleasant object and kusala
vipākacitta can experience only a pleasant object. 

The “Atthasālinī” (II, Book I, Part X, Ch VI, 293)
explains that the characteristic of kiriyacitta is the “mere acting or
doing of a function.”[131](#ftn131) There are different types of
kiriyacitta: those of the arahat, which perform the function of javana,
and those which do not perform the function of javana, but carry out
other functions and are common to the arahat and the non-arahat. As to
the kiriyacittas that do not perform the function of javana, the
“Atthasālinī” states that they are “fruitless like a plant with a
wind-snapped flower.” When a flower drops, there will be no fruit and so
the kiriyacitta is like that flower, it cannot produce any result. There
are two types of kiriyacitta that do not perform the function of javana:
the five-sense-door adverting-consciousness and the mind-door
adverting-consciousness. The five-sense-door adverting-conscious-ness
performs only one function, the function of adverting through the five
sense-doors. Whereas the mind-door adverting-consciousness performs two
functions: the function of adverting through the mind-door and the
function of determining the object, votthapana, through the five
sense-doors. 

Apart from these two types of kiriyacitta, which are
common to the arahat and the non-arahat alike, there are other types of
kiriyacitta which perform the function of javana, but only in the case
of the arahat. The “Atthasālinī” refers to these in the same section and
explains:

“That which has reached the state of javana (the kiriyacitta of the
arahat) is fruitless like the flower of an uprooted tree.”

 Only the arahat has kiriyacittas that perform the
function of javana, and these are neither akusala nor kusala; they
cannot produce any result. They are fruitless like the flower of an
uprooted tree because the arahat has eradicated all defilements. These
types of kiriyacitta merely accomplish the function of javana. 

During the eye-door process, when the five-sense-door
adverting-consciousness has already fallen away, it is succeeded by
seeing-consciousness, which is vipākacitta, the result of kamma that has
been performed. Kusala kamma conditions seeing-consciousness that is
kusala vipāka, which sees a visible object that is beautiful, enjoyable,
and, thus, a pleasant object. Akusala kamma conditions
seeing-consciousness that is akusala vipāka, which sees a visible object
that is not beautiful, not enjoyable, and, thus, an unpleasant object.
The vīthi-citta that hears through the ears, hearing-consciousness, is
vipākacitta. Nobody knows what kind of sound hearing-consciousness will
hear at a particular moment. It is all according to conditions; it
depends on kamma that was already performed in the past. When odour is
smelled through the nose, it is vipākacitta that is
smelling-consciousness. When flavour is tasted through the tongue, it is
vipākacitta that is tasting-consciousness. When tangible object is
experienced through the bodysense, such as cold, heat, softness or
hardness, it is vipākacitta that is body-consciousness. Kamma is the
condition for all these vipākacittas to arise and to experience an
object, after the five-sense-door adverting-consciousness has performed
its function of adverting to that object. 

The five pairs of sense-cognitions, such as seeing or
hearing, are contiguity-condition, anantara-paccaya, for the arising of
the succeeding citta, the receiving-consciousness that receives the
object. Receiving-consciousness is vipākacitta, it is the result of the
same kamma that produced the preceding sense-cognition. When the
receiving-consciousness has fallen away, the same kamma produces the
investigating-consciousness, which is also vipākacitta and which
performs the function of investigating, after the function of receiving
has been performed.

The vīthi-cittas which are vipāka and which arise in the
five-sense-door processes are: seeing-consciousness,
hearing-consciousness, smelling-consciousness, tasting-consciousness,
body-consciousness, receiving-consciousness and
investigating-consciousness. These cittas do not arise in their own
continuing series like the javana-cittas; they are merely results of
kamma. They arise, they perform their own function and then they fall
away. After the investigating-consciousness has fallen away, the
determining-consciousness, votthapana-citta, arises, and this citta is
actually the mind-door adverting-consciousness, mano-dvārāvajjana-citta,
performing the function of determining, votthapana, in the
five-sense-door processes. The determining-consciousness is kiriyacitta
that merely performs its function and then falls away; it does not arise
in its own continuing series. When it has fallen away, it is succeeded
by javana vīthi-cittas, which perform their function of “running through
the object,” and these may be kusala cittas or akusala cittas in the
case of the non-arahat. As we have seen, for the arahat the
javana-cittas are kiriyacittas. There are usually seven javana-cittas
and these are of the same type, arising and falling away in succession;
thus, these cittas arise in their own continuing series. This is also
happening at this very moment.

The “Atthasālinī” (II, Book I, Part X, Ch II, 279, 280)
uses a simile in order to explain the arising of vīthi-cittas that
experience an object in the five-sense-door process. We read:

A certain king went to bed and fell asleep. His attendant sat
shampooing his feet; a deaf doorkeeper stood at the door. Three guards
stood in a row. Then a certain man, resident at a border village,
bringing a present, came and knocked at the door. The deaf doorkeeper
did not hear the sound. He who shampooed the king’s feet gave a sign, by
which the doorkeeper opened the door and looked. The first guard took
the present and handed it to the second guard, who gave it to the third,
who in turn offered it to the king. The king partook of it...

 When we consider this parable we shall understand the
functions performed by each of the vīthi-cittas that arise and
experience the object. The impinging of the object on the eyesense is
like the knocking on the door by the resident of the border village who
brought the present. The resident of the border village cannot enter to
visit the king, but his present is handed to the first, second and third
guard who then offers it to the king. The function of the
five-sense-door adverting-consciousness is compared to the giving of a
sign by the attendant, who is shampooing the king’s feet. He knows that
a guest has come and knocks at the door. The five-sense-door
adverting-consciousness adverts to the object that impinges on one of
the sense-doors and then it falls away. After that, in the case of the
eye-door process, seeing-consciousness arises and performs the function
of seeing through the eyesense, which is the eye-door, and this is
compared to the doorkeeper who opens the door and looks. The
receiving-consciousness is compared to the first guard who receives the
present and hands it to the second guard. The
investigating-consciousness is like the second guard who examines the
present and hands it to the third guard. The determining-consciousness
is like the third guard who decides about the present and then offers it
to the king. The king who enjoys the present and partakes of it
represents the javana-cittas which succeed the determining-consciousness
and which enjoy the essential property of the object.

The object has as its only function to impinge on the
rūpa that is eyesense (the pasada rūpa). The resident of the border
village cannot enter to visit the king, but his present is handed to the
first, second and third guard who then offers it to the king. Only
seeing-consciousness performs the function of seeing the object
impinging on the eye-door. Visible object can only impinge on the rūpa
that is eyesense and the cittas of the eye-door process have to know
that object; the object cannot escape or intrude on one of the other
senses. Seeing-consciousness cannot perform the function of receiving
the object, it can only perform the function of seeing while it arises
at the eye-base. As we have seen, the receiving-consciousnessis compared
to the first guard who receives the present and hands it to the second
guard; the investigating-consciousness is compared to the second guard
who examines the present and hands it to the third guard; the
determining-consciousness is like the third guard who decides about the
present and then offers it to the king; the javana-cittas are like he
king who partakes of the present and “consumes” it. 

The words consuming, partaking of the present, help us
to understand the characteristics of the kusala cittas or akusala cittas
which perform the function of javana, “running through the object,”
through the eyes, the ears, the nose, the tongue, the bodysense or the
mind-door. The javana-cittas partake of the object with attachment,
aversion and ignorance; or they can be kusala citta or, in the case of
the arahat, kiriyacitta. The javana-cittas perform their own function;
they do not see, receive the object, investigate it or determine it,
because the preceding cittas have already performed all these functions.
Therefore, there are conditions for the arising of kusala cittas,
akusala cittas or kiriyacittas, which run through the object in a
succession of seven cittas of the same type. The javana vīthi-cittas can
partake of the object, they “consume” it. In the case of a “futile
course”[132](#ftn132), sound, for example, may impinge on the ear-sense,
but there will not be hearing, and javana-cittas will not arise either.
Even so, in the case of a course ending with determining-consciousness,
votthapana-citta, javana-cittas that are kusala cittas, akusala cittas
or kiriyacittas do not arise. Then there is no “consuming” of the
object. Whereas javana-cittas, which arise and fall away in a succession
of seven cittas of the same type, kusala, akusala or kiriya, do partake
of the object, they consume it. 

It is according to conditions that there are seven
javana-cittas arising and falling away in succession that partake of the
object. The first javana-citta is repetition-condition (asevana-paccaya)
for the second one, which arises and partakes of the object again and so
on until the seventh javana-citta, which is not repetition-condition for
the succeeding citta. Akusala javana vīthi-citta, kusala javana
vīthi-citta and kiriya javana vīthi-citta can be repetition-condition
for the arising of the succeeding citta. Through this condition, there
is a repetition of cittas of the same jāti (nature), which arise and
perform the function of javana, and, thus, kusala citta and akusala
citta can acquire strength, they can become kamma-condition for the
arising of vipāka in the future. Moreover, they can be natural strong
dependence-condition (pakatupanissaya-paccaya) for the arising again in
the future of kusala javana vīthi-citta and akusala javana vīthi-citta.
The frequent arising in a continuing series of different kinds of
akusala javana-cittas conditions an ever-increasing accumulation of
akusala. Because of this, we are infatuated with what we see as soon as
we wake up and open our eyes. When we are fast asleep and not dreaming,
there are bhavanga-cittas, but when we are dreaming or thinking, there
are no bhavanga-cittas but cittas arising in mind-door processes, which
are thinking. When there are bhavanga-cittas we do not know any object
through one of the six doors, any object of this world, but this does
not mean that we are without defilements. Also with the bhavanga-cittas
there are latent tendencies of defilements, anusaya kilesa. 

There are three levels of defilements:

- subtle defilement, anusaya kilesa, accumulated defilements which
 lie dormant in the citta as latent tendencies; 

- medium defilement, pariyuṭṭhāna[133](#ftn133) kilesa, arising
 together with the javana-citta; 
- coarse defilement, vītikkama[134](#ftn134) kilesa, arising
 together with the javana-citta. 



Thus, even with the cittas other than the javana-cittas
there are defilements, present in the form of latent tendencies. The
arahat has completely eradicated all defilements and thus he has no more
latent tendencies. 

The vīthi-citta which sees what appears through the
eyes, hears sound through the ears or experiences any other sense
object, is in that process followed by javana-cittas which arrange
themselves in their own series of several kāmāvacara cittas of the same
type: akusala citta, kusala citta or kiriyacitta. 

In the case of the eye-door process, there are seven
different types of vīthi-cittas.[135](#ftn135) It is the same in the
case of the ear-door process or the other sense-door processes, there
are seven different types of vīthi-cittas. In the case of the mind-door
process, there are three different types of vīthi-cittas.





Questions



1. Which vīthi-cittas in a five-sense-door process and in the
 mind-door process are vipākacittas? 

2. How many kiriyacittas does the non-arahat have? 

3. How many kiriyacittas that are not javana vīthi-cittas does the
 arahat have? 

4. What is repetition-condition, asevana-paccaya? 

5. Which cittas can be repetition-condition?