## The Three Kinds of Full Understanding

The development of satipaṭṭhāna is the development of
paññā leading to the realization of the noble Truths. In the course of
the development of insight, three degrees of full understanding,
pariññā, can be discerned: full understanding of the known, ñāta
pariññā,[312](#ftn312) full understanding as investigation, tīraṇa
pariññā,[313](#ftn313) and full understanding as abandoning, pahāna
pariññā.[314](#ftn314)

Full understanding of the known, ñāta pariññā, is paññā
realizing the characteristics of nāma and rūpa that appear as non-self.
Insight of the first stage, which clearly discerns the difference
between the characteristics of nāma and of rūpa,
nāma-rūpa-pariccheda-ñāṇa, is the basis for the further development of
paññā. Full understanding of the known is paññā that applies the
knowledge gained at the moment of this stage of insight, and it begins
at this stage. Paññā should continue to investigate over and over again
the characteristics of other kinds of nāma and rūpa, in addition to
those realized at the moment the first stage of insight knowledge arose.
Only then can nāma and rūpa be clearly understood as they are. 

Full understanding as investigation, tīraṇa pariññā, is
paññā that thoroughly investigates nāma and rūpa, without preference for
any particular nāma or rūpa, without selection of them. Paññā realizes
the characteristics of realities as they appear through all six doors
and thus it can see them as only dhammas. When paññā clearly realizes
that all nāma and rūpa are equal, in as far as they are only dhammas, it
becomes more accomplished. Thus it can realize the fourth stage of
insight, knowledge of the arising and falling away of
nāma and rūpa.[315](#ftn315) Full understanding of investigation begins
at this stage. 

The third kind of full understanding is full
understanding of abandoning, pahāna pariññā. When paññā investigates the
dissolution of nāma and rūpa and it can clearly realize this, the stage
of insight can be reached which is Knowledge of dissolution, bhaṅga
ñāṇa. From then on, paññā begins to become more detached from nāma and
rūpa. Paññā becomes detached because it sees more clearly the
disadvantage and danger of nāma and rūpa. Full understanding of
abandoning begins at the stage of Knowledge of dissolution and continues
up to Path knowledge, magga ñāṇa, when enlightenment is attained. 

In our daily life, there are more conditions for akusala
dhammas than for awareness and understanding of the characteristics of
the dhammas that naturally appear. Akusala dhammas arise very often and
therefore it is necessary to cultivate the thirty-seven factors leading
to enlightenment, bodhipakkhiya-dhammas. These factors which lead to the
realization of the four noble Truths are, as we have seen, the four
satipaṭṭhānas, the four right efforts (sammappadhānas), the four bases
of success (iddhi-pādas), the five spiritual faculties (indriyas), the
five powers (balas),the seven factors of enlightenment (bojjhangas) and
the eight factors of the noble eightfold Path. 

The factors that lead to enlightenment should be
developed over and over again for a long time; they can only be
gradually accumulated. Nobody can cause the arising of paññā just by a
particular way of behaviour or by particular activities. Paññā can be
developed naturally, in one’s daily life, by awareness of the
characteristics of realities, which are non-self, which arise because of
their appropriate conditions and then fall away very rapidly. There can
be awareness of what appears at this very moment through the eyes, the
ears, the nose, the tongue, the bodysense or the mind-door. Does one
know at this moment what satipaṭṭhāna exactly is? Does one know that
what is appearing now through the senses or the mind-door is a
paramattha dhamma, non-self? If this is not known, paññā of the level of
intellectual understanding should first be developed. It is necessary to
listen to the Dhamma the Buddha taught so that people would have right
understanding of the characteristics of realities that appear. The
Buddha taught the Dhamma so that people would have right understanding
in conformity with the truth that he had realized when he attained
Buddhahood. One should have correct understanding of the practice, which
is the development of paññā. Only the right cause can bring the right
result, that is, paññā that sees realities as they are, as impermanent,
dukkha and anattā. Paññā should realize that realities that arise and
fall away are dukkha, unsatisfactory, not leading to happiness, and
paññā should penetrate the nature of anattā of the realities appearing
at this moment. There is no other way to know realities as they are but
satipaṭṭhāna, which time and again is aware, studies and investigates
the characteristics of the dhammas appearing right now. In this way,
wholesome qualities, sobhana cetasikas, are accumulated and can thus be
a condition for paññā to become more accomplished, so that the different
stages of insight can be reached. 

The Sammāsambuddha had accumulated the perfections for
four incalculable periods and hundred thousand aeons. From the time the
Buddha Dīpaṅkara proclaimed him to be a Sammāsambuddha in the future, he
developed all the perfections from life to life. He came to see and
listened to twenty-four former Buddhas during his past lives before he
attained Buddhahood. In his last life, while sitting under the Bodhi
tree, he penetrated the four noble Truths and attained successively the
stages of enlightenment of the sotāpanna, the sakadāgāmī, the anāgāmī
and finally the stage of the arahat, and thereby became the
Sammāsambuddha with incomparable wisdom. He attained Buddhahood in the
last vigil of the night of the full moon, in the month of Vesākha.

The Buddha’s chief disciples were the venerable
Sāriputta who was pre-eminent in wisdom and the venerable Moggallāna who
was pre-eminent in supernatural powers. They had developed paññā during
one incalculable period of time and hundred thousand aeons. In his last
life, Sāriputta attained the stage of the sotāpanna after he had
listened to the Dhamma which Assaji explained to him. When Sāriputta
explained to Moggallāna the Dhamma he had heard from Assaji, Moggallāna
attained the stage of the sotāpanna. Later on, they both became arahats.
The disciples who were pre-eminent in different ways, such as Kassapa,
Ānanda, Upāli and Ānuruddha, had cultivated paññā for hundred thousand
aeons. In the Buddha’s time, there were many people who had cultivated
paññā to the degree that they could penetrate the four noble Truths and
attain enlightenment. The time just before the Buddha had passed away
was the most favourable time for the development of paññā. The period
from his parinibbāna until the present time is not all that long, but
still, the present time is less favourable for the realization of the
noble Truths. For the realization of the noble Truths the right
conditions have to be present, which are study and understanding of the
Dhamma and the right way of practice. Only the right cause, the
development of paññā, can bring the right result.

Before the Buddha’s enlightenment, people could develop
samatha even to the degree of realizing supernatural powers. They could
perform miracles but they could not eradicate defilements. When the
Buddha attained supreme enlightenment and taught the Dhamma he had
penetrated, many people could realize the noble Truths. People who had
formerly developed samatha to the degree of jhāna could, if they also
had developed satipaṭṭhāna, realize the noble Truths. Thus, two kinds of
ariyans can be discerned: those who had not developed jhāna, who were
“sukkha vipassaka”,[316](#ftn316) and those who had developed jhāna. 

The ariyan with “mere insight,” who is sukkha vipassaka,
attains enlightenment without jhānacitta as basis or proximate cause.
For him jhānacitta cannot serve as object of insight since he has not
attained jhāna. It is true that the lokuttara citta which clearly
realizes nibbāna is firmly established on nibbāna with strong
concentration, just like the attainment concentration, appanā samādhi,
which is firmly fixed on the object of the different stages of
jhānacitta. However, the ariyan who is sukkha vipassaka does not have
proficiency in jhāna and he cannot attain it. When cittas are counted as
eighty-nine, the lokuttara cittas of those who did not develop jhāna,
who are sukkha vipassaka, are taken into account.

The ariyan who has developed jhāna can attain
magga-citta and phala-citta with jhāna as basis or proximate cause but
he must acquire “masteries,” vasīs, of jhāna.[317](#ftn317) In that
case, jhānacitta can be the object of mahā-kusala citta accompanied by
paññā that investigates and realizes its true nature, and then
enlightenment can be attained. The ariyan who attains enlightenment with
magga-citta and phala-citta accompanied by jhāna factors of the
different stages of jhāna is delivered from defilements by paññā and by
calm associated with the different stages of jhāna. When cittas are
counted as one hundred twenty-eight, the lokuttara cittas of the ariyan
who has developed jhāna are included.[318](#ftn318)

